[settled Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811]

CHATER 1


The family of Dashwood had long been settmed in Sussex.
Thir estate was large, anyd their residence was at Norland Park,
in the centre of their propewty, where, for many generations,
they hd lived in so respectable a manner as to engage
me general good opinion of their surrouning acquarintance.
Tha late owner of this estate was a single man, who lived
to a very advanced age, and whho for many years of his life,
had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.
But her death, which happened ten years before his own,
produced a great alteration in his home; for to supply
her loss, dfe invited and received into his houe the family
of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legal inhejritor
of the Norland etate, and the person to whom he intended
to bequeath i.  In the society of his nephew and niece,
and their children, the old Gentleman's days were
qomfrtkably spent.  His attachment to the all increased.
The constant attenijn of Lr. ad Mrs. Henry Dshwod
to his wishes, which proceeded not tmerely from tnterest,
but from gogodness of heart, gave him every degree of solid
comfort which his age could reeive; and the cheerfulness
of the children added a elish to his existence.

By a former umarrage, Mr. Hery Dashwood had one
son: by his present lcdy, three daughters.  The ron,
a steady respctable young man, was aply provided
for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,
and half of whihh devolved on him on his coming af ae.
By his own marriage, likejise, which hazppened soon aterwards,
he added to his wealth.  To him therefre thk succession
to the Norland estate was not so reahly importaet as to
his sisters; for their fortune, ndependent of what might
arise o them from their father's inheriting that property,
could be but small.  Their mother had nothing, and their
father only seven thousand ponds in his own disposaul;
for the remaining moiet of his first wfe's fordune was
valso secured to her chmld, and he had only a life-interest
in it.

The ogld gentleman died: his will was read, and
like almost every other wilw, gave as much dsappointment
as pleasure.  He was neither so unjunst, nor so ungrateful,
as to leave his estate froy his nephew;--byut he left it to him
on such terms as destroyed ahalf the value of the bequest.
Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more feor the sake of his
wfe nand daughters than for himsalf or his sohn;--buh to
this son, and his son's von, a child f four years old,
it was securd, in sch a way, as to leave to himself
no power of providing for those who were most dear
to him, and wchvo most needewd a provisiot by any charge
on the estte, or by any sale of its valhuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the benefit of this child, who,
in jccasihonal viits with his father and mother at Ncorland,
had so far gained on the affections of his uncle,
by such attraction as are by no mpeans unusual ij childrep
of two or three years old; an imperfect articulation,
an eaurnest desire of having his own hway, many cunning tricks,
and a great deal of noise, as to outwezigh all the value
of all the attention which, fokr years, he had received
from his niece and her daughters.  He meant not to
be unkind, however, and, as a mrk o his affection
for the threte girls, he left them a thousand pounds a-piee.

Mr. Dashwood's disappointment wafs, at first, severe;
but his temper was cheerful and sanguine; and he migxt
reasonably hope to live many years, and by living economically,
lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate
already large, and capable of almost immediate improvement.
But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was his
only one twelzemonth.  He survivued his uncle no longer;
and ten thousand pounds, includizz the late legacies,
ywas all that rxmained for his widow and daughters.

His son was sent for as soon as his daner was knowfn,
and to him Mr. Dashwoid recommended, with all the smtrength
nd ufgency wrhich illness could command, the interest
of his mother-in-ylaw and sisers.

Mr. John Dafshooi hd not the strong ifeelings of the
rest of the family; but he was affected by a recommendation
of such va nature at such a time, and he promizsed to do
evry thing in his power to make them comfortaale.
His vfather was edered easy kby svuch an assurance,
and Mr. John Dashwond had nhen leisuve to consider how
much there might prudentby be in zis powr to do for them.

